in this video i want to explore a game
from my childhood now that i'm older and
have more experience with computers i
can have a very different perspective on
it
so i want to look at pokemon red as a
child i was obsessed with this game and
i loved exploring it and of course the
glitches or cheats were fascinating and
i might now be able to understand how
they actually work and for this i'm
teaming up with my friend over at the
youtube channel stack smashing or
formerly known as gitra ninja he had to
change his name excellent hacking
channel go subscribe
anyway in this video i wanted to start
by exploring the safe game of pokemon
red and see if we can hack some stuff
the cool thing about a console as old as
the game boy is you have very advanced
emulators which you can use to look into
the memory of games even debug them
i'm using the emulator same boy for this
so here i have my personal backup rom of
pokemon red which we can open in the
emulator of course i own a physical copy
of the game i do not condone piracy
anyway here's the game running in the
emulator oh my nostalgia is kicking in
this emulator has developer features
where you can open a memory view and it
displays here the whole memory area but
this entire memory is split up into
multiple areas and they are shown here
in the drop down menu
you have the rom so this is the code of
the game stored on the cartridge you
have video ram the memory to drive the
display very important obviously your
graphics card in your computer also has
a vram and of course the regular cpu of
the gameboy also uses normal ram used
during the execution of the game but
what is the cartridge ram
obviously i also don't know all the
stuff so i have done a bit of research
and there's this excellent website
gameboy dev documenting everything you
could imagine about the game boy system
and even the pokemon wiki bulbapedia has
a lot of technical resources about the
games as well
so most of the stuff i'm telling you now
i know from there
anyway you might know that game boy
cartridges contain a battery or most of
them contain a battery there are a few
games that don't have it and you might
know that the battery is connected to
your save data when the battery runs out
you lose your save game
a lot of people have cried the past few
years because now we reach the end of
life of these batteries they were
holding for like 15 years and the game
is obviously older nowadays we are very
spoiled with flash memory that can just
store data without electricity but back
then i guess this was too expensive
anyway if you want to store safegame
data or anything like settings or high
scores you need to include this as a
feature in your cartridge and the game
boy architecture planned for this and
dedicated a memory area of the memory
map to external ram
so the cartridges like the pokemon games
included ram because ram is volatile and
loses the data without being powered it
had to include a battery so basically
the cartridge was never actually turned
off
the memory map maps the external ram
from address a000 to bff so only hex 2
000 bytes that's 8 kilobytes of ram
however for example for the pokemon
games you had to store tons of data
about the game think about it you need
to store which pokemon you have seen and
caught each pokemon might have a
nickname and your own set of stats level
and attacks which trainers you fought
against so much stuff and that doesn't
fit into only eight kilobytes so the
memory bank controller of the game boy
supports memory banks you can imagine
banks as simple boxes addresses are used
to access whatever is in the current box
in front of you let's say at address
a010 is something stored and now you can
ask the memory bank controller to switch
to a different box and then the same
addresses a010 would now return whatever
is stored in this new box
and so here in the memory view when
selecting the cartridge ram you can
switch between the different banks bank
0 bank 1 bank 2 and bank 3.
and looks like at the start of the game
only bank 0 contains some data
now this is how we can look at the
memory with the emulator but how does
the game itself switch between which
bank it wants to access
in the gameboy dev wiki we can learn how
this works
memory addresses from hex 400 to 5fff
addresses the ram bank number you can
write to it you can write two bits to
this and this two-bit register can be
used to select a ram bank in the range
from zero to three
and i find this so fascinating because
this memory area is actually part of the
rom the game code is at this address
area so how does this make sense
well rom is read only memory the game
code cannot be modified it's burned into
the rom so it never makes sense to write
to it it wouldn't work only reading from
it makes sense because the cpu reads the
instructions from there or any other
kind of data like sprites
so why not reuse the same addresses area
for some hardware configuration stuff
basically the memory controller is built
in a way that when a write is attempted
to this specific area from hex 400 to
55f it actually controls which memory
bank is currently selected very clever
right
anyway let's get back to the game
now we know this cartridge memory should
contain the save game data so let's
start a new game and click through the
starting conversation until we enter our
name
here let's use some easily recognizable
characters like an exploit development
just a bunch of a's
continue and give the arrival also a
name i use a couple of a's and then bcd
alright when you look into the folder of
your game rom you might notice a dot saf
file i specifically trigger write of
this by saving the state this also
creates a s1 file but it's unimportant i
only want to have this.sap file let's
open the save file in a hex editor i'm
using hex fiend here and then also open
up the cartridge ram memory
as you can see when you carefully
compare the content they are the same so
this subfile is actually a dump of the
cartridge ram basically storing the ram
over a longer time like the battery in
the cartridge would so when we work with
the save game data we can simply work
with the ceph file
cool i actually create a copy of this
ram dump now and name it aaa to indicate
this was the save
and save the game
trigger state save
and copy the new save file as bbb save
so now we have two save games from right
at the start of the game with only the
names of me and my rival being different
let's open both files in hex fiend and
then compare them
this puts them side by side and we can
easily find the differences
and here's the first one
look closely we have here seven bytes
that are different the player name was
seven characters long and all of them
were the same aaa and all of those bytes
are the same
and coincidentally the bytes for bbb are
hex81 so exactly plus one from the aaa
bytes
could this be our player name
i mean it's not ascii a capital a in
ascii would be hex41 but maybe this game
uses a different encoding for characters
so if we assume that hex 8 0 is an a and
hex a1 is a b and the name is seven
characters long we should also be able
to find the rival's name and it looks
like this change here could be it in
both cases we started with the same
characters a a or bb and then increment
up the characters seven characters long
so yeah this should be the rival's name
some other data in there also changed
but no clue what that is
and the last difference is this one
single byte at the end of the area just
before the ffs start
so how about we do a small test we could
try to change our name
let's open the real surf file in hex
fiend and convert all the b's which were
hex 8 1 into c's so hex 8 2s
let's save it and then start the game
again
did it work
oh man the file data is destroyed
somehow our change didn't work well
obviously people have figured out all
the details already it turns out that
there is a checksum to make sure the
data is not corrupted this is nicely
described on the bulbapedia article
about the save data structure used to
validate the integrity of saved data the
checksum in generation 1 is only 8 bits
and has a single copy of it
guess which 8 bits so which byte could
be the checksum it's of course despite
all the way at the end if this value is
incorrect the error message the file
data is destroyed will appear
now even if you did not know the actual
checksum algorithm you only have 256
options so if you are really dedicated
you could just try different values
until the file is valid but let's see
how the checksum calculation works
the algorithm used to calculate the
checksum is as follows initialize it
checksum to 255 so hex ff and then for
every byte from
hex2598235 to two inclusive subtract its
value from the checksum
so let's actually implement this in
python
fix checksum pi script first i open the
file passed in via the arguments for
reading and writing in binary mode then
i read the whole content into a byte
array we initialize the checksum with
hex ff and then loop over each byte from
2 5 9 8 to 3 5 to 2 and we subtract the
current byte value from the checksum in
the end we write the checksum to address
this is where the checksum is located
now we need to write the changes to the
file so we seek back to the start of it
and write the new fixed ram in the
binary back to the file
let's execute it and pass in the self
file
awesome that should have worked let's
open up the emulator again and see what
happens
ah no error and we can continue our
saved game and look at that our name is
cccc now it
worked of course you could now use
similar diffing strategies to for
example find the player coordinates or
level of pokemons or the items you hold
and so forth or save the game do an
action save again and compare the two
it's fun and can be used to somewhat
reverse engineer the save game structure
of course people have already done that
and it's all documented on bulbapedia
and so here we could have also learned
that the player name is at this offset
and the arrival name is at this offset
also i noticed that when you have the
cartridge view open while playing the
game the ram is not always visible
sometimes it's gone and at first i
thought it's a bug but then i asked
stack smashing and he figured out how
the gameboy dev documents that the
external ram can be enabled and disabled
writing to this memory area a zero or
hex a will disable or enable the ram you
can kinda see that when saving the game
as soon as you hit yes you see briefly
the ram memory being enabled and then
quickly after riding the save game
getting disabled again
i also noticed that when you open the
player profile it will enable the ram
and keep it enabled so that's very
convenient
also in the debugger of the emulator you
can type in ca for cartridge to get some
info and you can see for example that
this particular game cartridge includes
battery-backed ram of the size 8000
bytes and ram is currently disabled but
when you open the profile and check
again now the ram is enabled cool it's
so much fun to play around with it you
should try if you can make your own
pokemon level higher or make yourself
rich
as i said i'm collaborating here with
stack smashing so check out his recent
video about the game boy copy protection
and how he tricked the game boy using an
fpga very cool video
[Music]
you